and thank you for joining us for the
daily briefing on our fight against
coronavirus I'm joined today by dr.
Yvonne Doyle who is the medical director
of public health England before
Yvonne provides an update on the latest
data from our Cobra coronavirus fact
file I'd like to update you on the steps
that we are taking to defeat this
pandemic our step-by-step action plan is
aiming to slow the spread of the virus
so fewer people need hospital treatment
at any one time protecting the ability
of the NHS to cope throughout our
response to coronavirus we have been
following the scientific and medical
advice we have been deliberate in our
actions taking the right steps at the
right time we're also taking
unprecedented action to increase NHS
capacity by dramatically expanding the
number of beds key staff and life-saving
equipment on the frontline provide the
care when people need it most the daily
figures show that a total of 152
thousand nine hundred and seventy nine
people in the UK have now been tested
for coronavirus of those 29 thousand
four hundred and seventy four have
tested positive the number of people
admitted to hospital in England with
coronavirus symptoms is now ten thousand
seven hundred and sixty-seven was three
thousand nine hundred fifteen of those
are in London and 1918 in the Midlands
of those hospitalized in the UK sadly
two thousand three hundred and fifty-two
have died this is an increase of 563
fatalities since yesterday the youngest
of them was just 13 years old all our
thoughts and prayers are with the
families and loved ones of those who
lost their lives this is more tragic
evidence that this virus does not
discriminate the corona virus pandemic
is the biggest threat our country has
faced in decade
and we're not alone all over the world
we are seeing the devastating impact of
this invisible killer we recognize the
extreme disruption the necessary actions
we are asking people to take are having
on their lives their businesses jobs and
the nation's economy and I want to thank
every one across our whole country for
the huge effort that is being made
collectively in tackling the kovat 19
pandemic to the frontline workers
treating and caring for patients the
people delivering supplies to their
neighbors and the millions staying at
home thank you you are protecting the
NHS and saving lives and I want to thank
businesses too through your support for
your workers and your communities and
through your willingness to support our
health service you are making a real
difference whether it's any us building
a new hand silent sanitizer plant near
Middlesbrough in just 10 days or you CL
engineers working with Mercedes formula
1 to build new continuous positive
airway pressure machines which help
patients to breathe more easily or
broadband providers giving their
customers unlimited data to stay
connected or indeed London London's
Excel center being converted in the NHS
Nightingale hospital with space for
4,000 patients these are just a few of
the examples of businesses from across
our great nation supporting life-saving
work there are also thousands of
businesses large and small which have
worked with staff to ensure that they're
supported in the days and weeks ahead
whether that is through ensuring Phe
guidelines are followed on-site
implementing furlough schemes carrying
over annual leave or providing the means
to work from home I want to convey my
heartfelt thanks to all of those
businesses up and down the country which
are working to keep our economy going so
that when this crisis passes and it will
we are ready to bounce back our
are doing all they can to support our
people and I want to make it clear that
government in turn will do all it can to
support our businesses we have already
taken unprecedented action to support
businesses safeguard jobs and protect
the economy from today businesses will
start benefiting from twenty two billion
pounds in the form of business rates
relief and grants for up to twenty five
thousand pounds which are being paid
into the bank accounts or the smallest
high street firms on Saturday I said
that we had provided funds to councils
in England for grants to small
businesses as of today these local
authorities have received more than
twelve billion pounds this afternoon I
held a call with hundreds of local
authorities across England and made
clear that this money must reach
businesses as quickly as possible and I
know that businesses across England have
already started to receive these grants
we know high street banks are working
really hard to support the UK through
this period including through mortgage
holidays and increased credit facilities
loans for businesses are also being
issued through the covetous interruption
loan scheme since it came into operation
last week the Chancellor to go to the
Bank of England and the financial
conduct authority wrote the chief
executives of the UK banks to urge them
to make sure that the benefits of the
loan scheme are passed through to
businesses and consumers and it would be
completely unacceptable if any banks
were unfairly refusing funds to good
businesses in financial difficulty just
as a taxpayer stepped in to help the
banks back in 2008 we will work with the
banks to do everything they can to repay
that favor and support the businesses
and people or the United Kingdom in
their time of need of
this is a brand-new scheme and as with
all new schemes it will not be perfect
from the outset we are listening all the
time and a response to concerns that
we've heard from businesses we are
looking at ways in which we can ensure
they get the support they need the
Chancellor would be saying more on this
in the coming days it is crucial that
when we overcome this crisis as in time
we will the businesses are in a good
position to move forward times are tough
and we have harder times ahead of us but
I know that together we will pull
through Evon Thank You Secretary of
State I would like to present you with
some slides just to give you an update
on what is happening across the country
and also with the Health System could I
have slide one please and this shows
slightly concerning trend because we
have seen an uptick in motor vehicle
traffic so the message here really is
people do need to stay at home and most
are doing the right thing as you can see
from the rapid decline in public
transport use so everyone needs to do
that the message here is we need to save
lives and protect the NHS so please stay
at home could I have slide two please
this shows the number of new UK cases as
of today it is slightly concerning it's
still too early to say whether the
plateau of hospital admissions has ended
but we've now seen three days of
increases in a row and again we need to
protect the NHS and the best way to do
that is to stay at home to avoid
catching the disease yourself and
obviously avoid giving it to anyone else
that is the way the NHS can continue to
protect us could I have slide three
please
this slide shows the England Hospice
missions I think a lot of reporting has
been about London and you can see why on
this slide and that's where coronavirus
is most advanced but the chart shows
that the threat is everywhere we need to
protect the NHS everywhere and the
Midlands now is obviously a concern as
well and slide for please and this is
what it's all about it is about saving
lives this slide shows the global death
comparisons we need to save lives as
things stand it has not been as severe
here as in France and we're just tucked
in under the USA and obviously Italy on
a different trajectory but and Spain and
the United States as we said but there
is no reason to be complacent stay at
home protect the NHS save lives thank
you thank you Vaughn I think we'll now
move to the Q&A the first question is
from the BBC Laura Koons Berg Laura
thank you very much Secretary of State
and the peak of this disease seems to be
coming earlier than the government
expected but you are missing the testing
targets there's a huge amount of
evidence of staff not having the
equipment they desperately need there
are not enough ventilators
do you accept now that the approach and
the response from government has just
been too slow Laura thank you very much
for that question but can I just make it
absolute clear and the Prime Minister
has been very clear about this is well
is it increasing testing capacity is
absolutely the government's top priority
we're now at 10,000 tests a day we're
rolling out additional networks of labs
and testing sites and in terms of phe
over the last two weeks 390 million
products have been distributed and of
course we will continue to do more and
work to make sure that pH is available
as you know there is a hotline which is
available 24 hour hotline for NHS staff
as well but if on if you wanted to
comment on this piece Thank You
Secretary of State so Laura the there is
positive news about this we committed
nhsn Phe committed to make 10,000 tests
a day available we have met that target
by the end of March early April and we
have some more capacity and our
commitment is actually to go to 25,000
tests a day and we are confident with
our industry partners that we will
achieve that so that means patients are
getting at the tests they need but there
is also spare some spare capacity in
that for testing the most urgent health
care workers and alongside that a
secretary of state assert there is a
second strand front opening and as
already testing a couple of thousand
health care workers in an order of
priority so we are definitely increasing
our testing capacity Thank You Laura and
next question is from skybet Rigby Beth
thank you question for New York you give
us the number and proportion of firm
line NHS staff we've been tested for
coronavirus you said mm is that out of
half a million frontline NH has workers
and how are you intending to scale that
up and if I may to the Secretary of
State the prime minister said nearly two
weeks ago he wanted to get to a quarter
of a million tests a day that was the
virus an antibody test latest daily
figures ten thousand four hundred and
twelve tests why is it taken so long for
reality to match the rhetoric and will
you give a clear timeframe as to when
you will deliver on the prime minister's
promise thank you thank you so Beth and
the number of tests undertaken in the
NHS public health England combined
testing capacity is it just increasing
at the moment so that will be a
relatively small number but there is
capacity for example today for almost
3,000 and that will increase as we get
to 25,000 that capacity but the
important capacity is in the second
strand where we will have five and have
five centers where people can drive
through and get their testing done in
order of priority NHS chief executives
are identifying that priority
the intention here is to get from
thousands to hundreds of thousands
within the coming weeks so we are very
committed to our NHS frontline staff
thank you we won't thank you for that
and I think Beth if honest explained the
details in terms of ramping up testing
you made particular reference to the
antibody test and what I can say on that
is of course we are urgently evaluating
that test and it is an absolute priority
and of course this is about making sure
that people who have the test can find
out whether they've had the virus and
are now immune to it the chief
scientific officer has said that the
accuracy of this test is incredibly
important so it's also important that we
get this right before we launch the test
itself thank you for that the next
question is from ITV Robert Peston
Robert hello good afternoon largely a
question I think groove on Doyle if I
reported this afternoon that a million
antibody tests are arriving from China
in the coming few days they have been
paid for by the government the
government of said it won't pay for
anything he doesn't think as it works
but I am told that PHA public I think
England is dragging its feet in giving
its approval to the use of these tests
I'm also told that these tests would be
an alternative to PCR and would actually
detect active virus for example if
frontline staff when will they be in
hospitals for use thank you Robert
so the antibody tests the important
thing about these antibody tests is it's
not a matter of dragging your feet it's
important that the test is valid that it
does what it says it does and as the
chief medical officer said there's
something worse than no test is is a
wrong test or a bad test so that is what
is being tested at the moment and in the
meantime there is a separate strand
which is very important which is called
seroprevalence where our own labs are
testing the validity of whether the
blood samples were getting very
generously from people who've had the
disease but also from blood and
transplant and from the College of GPs
surveil
scheme whether those tests are also
valid and we are very pleased about that
so I would say Robert as soon as we can
we want to be out there doing these
tests thank you thank you Robert Thank
You Vaughn the next question is from The
Evening Standard from Joe Murphy Joe
hello may I ask Avant oil
if 2000 NHS staff have been tested so
far and 125,000 our self isolating or
thereabout
that's by my reckoning 1.6 percent can I
pin you to a target for the improvement
that you promised in the previous answer
what for example will that number look
like in one week from today and do you
think people are getting complacent
about the measures that have been put in
and mr. Sharma I think a lot of us feel
that we haven't yet been given a full
and practical explanation of why Germany
is able to test many times more than the
UK do they have more labs more equipment
are they making better use of
universities or the private sector than
earth and if so why or are they using a
different perhaps a quicker test and
what are the reagents that we're
struggling to get we're looking to work
out is this a capacity issue for the
Germany versus the UK or is it a
political choice that's made us test
fewer people well I'll take I presume
you're talking about the health care
worker frontline testing and the
intention there as I say is to go from
thousands of thousands to hundreds of
thousands that will have to go on the
basis of the priority that has
identified as to which of these workers
are actually needed when I say work as
they're really staff or colleagues are
needed in which settings particularly
where the sickest patients are and they
will be tested first so that is the
intention over the coming weeks and do
you while I'm speaking do you wish me to
speak about the reagent just about the
reagents so the reagents are generally
produced by the manufacturers of the
machines and so the reagents that work
best are those that work with the
machines that they're intended for
that's the most efficient we are working
with at the industry
to ensure that that supply is good and
that the machinery is most efficient but
as the head of the industry has said
there is a global market and this but
they are committed to working with the
UK government and with us to ensure that
we get those tests through as quickly
and there is complementary work going on
to ensure that we can supplement that if
needed and that is very exciting for the
future Joe I think you you asked you
made reference to Germany
we of course look to see where we can
learn throughout this process and of
course we are working with industry were
working to scientific community to make
sure that we have you know maximum
possible supplies but I just go back to
the point that Jenny Harry's the the
deputy chief medical officer made some
days ago when he said that she said
we're looking to create a lab based
based testing on a scale which is
comparable to building a medical
equivalent of a car factory so we are
trying to do something at huge scale
very fast but I think as you've heard
from Yvonne we are making progress we
will continue to make progress and we
are determined to make sure that we have
the supplies and provides the support
that we can for people across the UK and
particularly the most vulnerable and
those key workers in the NHS thank you
very much for that Joe I think this
question is from Financial Times from
Laura Hughes Laura good afternoon what
is the government's exit strategy for
getting us out of this lockdown and what
role will testing play in that Jeremy
Hunt has called for massive community
testing is it too late for that
or is that a government's policy and one
that we'll see being carried out over
the next few weeks and months well thank
you for that Laura let me just say a few
words before I pass on to to go on on
this of course people will understand
across the country why we have put these
restrictions in place and the promise
was very clear they were for an initial
three-week period and we would review
them but what's also really important is
that if we stop these too quickly there
is a possibility that that effort that
people have made that massive effort
people are made across the country is
wasted and we could
potentially see a dangerous second peak
we actually want to avoid that but I
think it may be helpful even if you want
to amplify on this particular point
Thank You Secretary of State so we the
Prime Minister has committed to taking
review of this after Easter and I think
it's important to say that we are
looking at this through the scientific
lens as well through modeling and
through the information we're getting
from clinical cases as to how this
epidemic is progressing and we will be
guided by that Laura so we obviously
want to make the right call at the right
time on this and it is something that we
have to keep reviewing every week and
they certainly were very close to Sage
and the modeling on that but in terms of
the mouse testing which is your other
point here so testing if the testing
strategy is in to increase the amount of
testing done not just in healthcare
workers but in the population but the
rate limiting step there is not us it's
really whether the tests are valid and
how then to get that out and about and
aided by technology and I think that
will change as the phases of this
epidemic change we will perhaps use
different techniques in the beginning at
the containment phase this was very
people very professional people
dependent in the community we obviously
would want this to go faster as the we
come to a different phase of the
epidemic thank you for that Yvonne we
have one final question which is from
buzzfeed from Emily Ashton Emily hi this
is a question I think NHS frontline
workers across the country are showing
extraordinary courage and showing up a
hospital's day after day in horrific
circumstances and you may have seen
today a joint statement from trade
unions saying the lack of personal
protective equipment has become a crisis
within a crisis workers are being put at
unnecessary risk and they're also going
into work not knowing whether they have
been infected by this virus or not and
many wondering why we weren't preparing
for testing much earlier and the
government keeps offering them warm
words that we've heard more of those
this evening but do you accept that you
are putting though those workers in
dangerous situation I'd really need to
act urgently to keep them safe Emily
thank you for that at UMC right I mean I
pay tribute to the amazing work that NHS
staff in the frontline across the whole
of the NHS and across the public service
are doing at this time to support us and
support the population and pacifically
on the point of PPE I think as I said in
response to an earlier question over the
past two weeks we have delivered over
390 million PPE
products we've ensured that these are
being delivered to every GP practice to
dentists committee pharmacies and there
is also now a 24 hour NHS run hotline
where NHS and social care workers can
call and request that PPE if it's needed
of course we will continue to do as much
as we can more to get more of this
equipment to the frontline because at
the end of there you are apps you write
this is about helping and supporting
those who are making a difference in
helping and supporting our population
Thank You Secretary of State so Emily it
is absolutely our commitment to protect
frontline staff and we are in touch with
a wide range of leaders clinical leaders
nursing leaders community leaders and
the trade unions and they are aware of
our intention we are working very
rapidly at the moment to ensure that the
deliveries reach where they're needed
and good stopped taking on that and also
that our guide our guidance is easily
understood and people understand what
they actually need to keep them safe in
the circumstances they're in great well
thank you very much I think that was our
last question could I just end by saying
is that we do request that everybody
follows the government guidelines
ultimately this is about staying at home
protecting the NHS and saving lives and
we will get through this working
together thank you
you
[Music]